+++
title = 'Using MSAL in a React application'
summary = 'Using MSAL in a React application.'
tags = ['react', 'msal']
categories = ['development']
keywords = ['react', 'msal', 'authentication']
date = 2024-06-24
draft = true
# [cover]
#     image = 'cover_image.webp'
#     alt = "Using an Azure function to get Octopus deployment notifications in Slack"
#     caption = "Image generated by Dall-E."
#     relative = true # when using page bundles set this to true
#     hidden = false # only hide on current single page
#     hiddenInSingle = false
+++

> _**tl;dr**_ TODO.

## Introduction

I typically create React/Typescript apps (with a .NET API) that run in Azure, so for me [Microsoft Authentication Library (MSAL)](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/identity-platform/msal-overview) is the go to library when I need to authenticate users via Azure Entra Id. In this article I will discuss a [sample app I made](https://github.com/pm7y/React-MSAL-Example) which aims to be a useful reference for integrating MSAL into a React/Typescript app.

The starting point for the app was a new React/Typescript app create using a Vite template command shown below. The files created by this command are contained in the [first commit](https://github.com/pm7y/React-MSAL-Example/commit/af0c46e1da4a71b1b27041bf7647ea9074820820) in the repo.

```
npm create vite@latest react-msal -- --template react-swc-ts
```

The second commit contains all of the changes made to integrate MSAL on top of the newly minted app.

## Installing MSAL Packages

TODO.

## Initialisation

TODO.

## Logging In and Out

TODO.

## Accessing Claims

TODO.

## Acquiring a Token to Call an API

TODO.

## Adding a Router

TODO.

## Implementing a Custom Navigation Client

TODO.

## Conclusion

TODO.

Thanks for reading.

### Appendix I - Create a new React app using Vite

TODO 

### Appendix II - Create an Entra Id App Registration

TODO 